---
title: "Choosing Next.js for Static Site Generation"
date: "2022-06-14"
---

Being able to choose the appropriate tool is an imporant skill for developers; and since no tool is perfect, a developer has to analyze the benefits and drawbacks of her options before she makes a decision. When it was time for me to decide which static site generator to use for my professional website and developer blog, ease of use was the most important quality to me. The approach I decided to use to help me decide which SSG I wanted to work with was something you might be familiar with because you did it during undergrad: labs. For each SSG, I went through the quickstart guides they provided and based my decision off of my experience doing that.

Jekyll seemed like a good choice, but after discovering that it doesn't play well with Ruby 3 and that Github was wavering on whether or not to maintain it, I decided that it wasn't dependable and might result in more work down the line. Hugo was my next option and not only was it incredibly fast, but easy to set up. A few commands on the command line and some configuration with the theme results in a seemingly polished static site with most if not all the features I wanted for a personal developer site. However, I didn't want to familiarize myself with Go Templates and I didn't want to be beholden to a template and it's creator for features that I might've wanted. That really left Gatsby and Next which are both React frameworks that are slightly opinionated and have some neat optimization and seo features built in. The predominating opinion seems to be that Gatsby is great for static sites and plays nicely with headless CMS's like Netlify to create a really straightforward workflow for adding blog posts, while Next is suited for SPA's that require scaling optimizations because it exclusively runs on a Node server. Both frameworks are consistently updated and maintained, are easy to set up quickly, use React components (which I'm familiar with) and have very good build and response times (both perform better than Hugo on some benchmarks, but who really knows). If you're already familiar with React, I recommend that you go through the quickstart tutorials for both frameworks and see which one works for you, however if you're new to React then I'd suggest going with Hugo.

As I was going through the Gatsby tutorial that has you create a simple personal site, I found that I didn't like the GraphQL and MDX dependencies. I dont know anything about GraphQL and a lot of the packages that the tutorial had you download had dependency issues and a multitude of moderate and high vulnerabilities. For something so simple, there sure were a lot of moving parts. If there were so many bumps in the road with the quickstart tutorial, then how bad would it get once I want to add something like an API or move my posts to a database? No, this wasn't for me.

It felt much better to me going through the Next quickstart tutorial. I had this site up and running with basically no warnings or issues and everything is contained within the filesystem. None of the packages that I installed threw any warnings, especially the ones that were released and maintained by Next. I mentioned earlier that the build times for Gatsby ended up being the fastest on two of the benchmarks that I found, but it turned out that the post-initial build times I experienced during the Gatsby quickstart was noticeably longer than the Next build times (~21 seconds and ~5 seconds respectively). In addition to the faster build time, Next had all of its optimization built into the default package instead of having to download additional packages for optimization like I did in the Gatsby tutorial.

At the moment, I look forward to working with Next to fully personalize and improve my personal site. There remains the possiblity that I made the wrong choice and will have to migrate to Gatsby or another SSG, but at this point, I finally have a landing page that's fast and somewhere to record my thoughts and observations about my programming experience. Hopefully the SEO optimization touted by Next has worked, your search has brought you here, and my post has helped you with your decision of which SSG to go with. That being said, I'm a proponent of making your own decision, so please, go through the quickstarts for a few SSG's and make your own decision. Once you do, feel free to reach out to me and share your thoughts.
